---
id: 251
title: Why is it difficult to fight against DRM?
date: 2017-07-08T00:15:01+00:00
author: Abhas Abhinav
layout: post
guid: http://solitude.io/?p=251
permalink: /2017/07/why-is-it-difficult-to-fight-against-drm/
image: /wp-content/uploads/2017/07/drm.png
subtitle: What is DRM? Why do publishers use DRM for their content? What are
  the problems and inherent fallacies with the use of DRM? Why must we reject
  DRM so that we can protect and preserve our freedom?
categories:
  - drm
  - free-software
---
The Defective by Design initiative was formed almost 10 years back to raise
awareness about DRM and how it harms users. It has evolved into a movement that
encourages users to reject DRM instead of just making them aware of its
existence, abuses and dangers.

July 9th, 2017 is going to be celebrated as the International Day against DRM
and on this occasion I'd like to highlight my personal view on why the fight
against DRM is difficult and why DRM-enabled platforms have been growing and
becoming more mainstream.

However, it doesn't mean that its not possible to choose a world without DRM.
And I have some suggestions on how to get started, should you choose to.

## What is DRM?

DRM officially stands for "Digital Rights Management" (*rights* of the
publisher/author). The Free Software community regularly expands DRM to mean
"Digital Restrictions Management"... but it does nothing to  assert, protect or
promote the rights of users. Either way, DRM refers to techniques that limit
you from doing what you might usually expect to do with various forms of
digital media - like share, archive, copy, extract, transfer them. It usually
involves using cryptography to encrypt the content in a way that it can be
uniquely decoded by the intended user. But many so-called DRM systems
essentially rely on obscurity and ignorance of users to restrict them from even
doing simple things - such as playing music that you might have purchased or
downloaded through the software without an active paid subscription to the DRM
system.

What is the first thing that comes to your mind when you hear about DRM? Kindle
eBooks? Netflix? Amazon Prime? Audible? How about Gaana &amp; Hotstar? How
about magazines on Google Play Newstand and Magzter? All of these content
platforms use some form of DRM to lock you, the user, into using their software
and platforms on their terms if you want to access or consume their content.
DRM is about controlling the users' experience of content and the terms on
which it is available to the user.

In simple words, DRM is the technique a content publisher uses to ensure that
they can track, limit and control who can access their content, on what terms,
on which devices and operating systems, at what cost and so on. They use
technological means tend to criminalise and disable the ability (at least for
most non-technical users) of a person to share content that they might have
access to - either gratis or after a purchase.

<blockquote>DRM systems are borne out of fear and distrust of their
users.</blockquote>

The reason the Free Software Foundation (FSF), the Electronic Frontier
Foundation (EFF) and other such organisations launch campaigns against DRM is
because the prevalence, usage and popularity of various content platforms only
strengths the roots of DRM in society; DRM remains a viable and reliable model
for publishing content only as far as there are users who choose to use it and
who accept it was a way of life. The reason why DRM is unacceptable as a way of
life and dangerous is that it has serious conflicts with the rights of users
and their right to freedom, sharing and privacy.

## The Roots of DRM

So lets take a step back and look at the different ways DRM creeps into our
lives and how, sometimes, we don't even know it or question it.

Lets say you read a review or a mention about a book in a magazine or on a blog
and you find it interesting and decide to purchase it. Now what are you
options? You could visit a book store and purchase a printed copy. You could
use an online shopping website and order a printed copy and then wait for it to
be delivered to you. Or you could purchase a digital copy and read it on your
mobile device or computer or eReader. You could also borrow a copy from a
library (if you had access to one). Or from someone you know who had the book.

The choice you make about how you want to read this book is determined by three
factors:

  * (a) how quickly you want to get access to it,

  * (b) how much (if at all) you want to pay for it, and

  * (c) if you want to read it on a computer or on paper. And based on which of
    these factors are most important to you, there are corresponding
    trade-offs.

Purchasing an ebook might be the quickest way to get access to the book, but
then you would be "<em>forced</em>" to read it on an eReader or computer or
mobile device. And then you might not be able to print it out. Or lend it to
others.

Purchasing a printed copy from a book store would mean travel and inconvenience
since all book stores don't stock all the books. So if the one you went to
didn't have the book, it might need to procure it for you and that might take
additional time. Not to mention the (possibly) additional cost of doing so.
Purchasing the same printed copy from an online store would at least be
convenient and in the best case (for a popular book), you might even be able to
get the book in your hands in a day or two.

But then if you really liked the book and wanted to read it in any free time
you had, you would have to carry it with you. And this means, added weight to
you bag in addition to the effort of having to lug the book around. And what if
you didn't want others to see (or question) what you were reading? Or why?

This decision making might look complicated and unduly complex. But, its
reasonable. The questions above are real and the concerns valid.

So if you decided that you wanted the book quickly, didn't mind reading it on
your mobile device or computer and knew in advance that you wouldn't want to
share it with others (or print it out or copy/paste from it or quote from it at
length), then choosing to purchase an eBook might be a natural choice. You
would get the book instantaneously and conveniently.

Or if you preferred to read books printed on paper, then you might just
purchase a printed copy in the most convenient and quick manner.

Or if you preferred eBooks, but didn't want to pay for it (or couldn't afford
to pay for it), you could "borrow" it from an eBook library or access it from a
peer-to-peer file sharing site (if it were popular and available).

You might wonder why we are examining these choices in the context of DRM. But,
actually, DRM is an integrated component of the choices above. Many popular
eBook platforms such as the Kindle publish books with DRM in them that limit
what you can do with those eBooks. They favour an economy where everyone who
wanted access to a book, purchased one; and unlike the printed book economy,
don't envision (or encourage) people wanting to resell or lend books they have
read or don't need anymore.

The problem is the digital nature of the artefact (book). When you have a
physical book (a printed copy) it has certain properties: it can only be in one
place at one time and it takes time, money and effort to duplicate (eg. if you
photocopied a book). In other words, the <em>marginal cost of duplicating a
printed book</em> is not zero. However, this does not hold true in the case of
eBooks. If you made a copy of an eBook, you have two copies of it without
putting in any substantial effort in doing this duplication. If you could make
two copies, you could also make a thousand. And by virtue of this fact, you
could also share it widely and make it available to everyone else at a lower or
no cost.

The reason eBook publishers give for incorporating DRM within their
publications is to thwart copyright violation. They argue that publishing
eBooks without DRM would significantly impair their commerce and if people
could just share the eBook around, no one would buy it.

But, ...

> The only reason to use DRM is because your customers want to do something and
> you don't want them to do it. If someone else can offer your customers a
> player that does the stuff you hate and they love, they'll buy it. So your
> DRM vanishes.
> <p class="content__headline"><em><a
href="https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2014/feb/05/digital-rights-management">"What
happens with digital rights management in the real world?"</a></em> / The
Guardian</p>

The problem with DRM is also its overzealous classification of every user as a
potential violator and further crippling and restriction of a user's rights.
When you buy an eBook on an ebook store, your purchase is specifically linked
to that store. To continue to have access to the book, the store would need to
remain alive and operational and in business. Having purchased the book on one
store does not imply that you would own a copy of the same book in other eBook
stores as well. Or you could shift your purchase from one store to another. So
in case you decide to start using another eBook store, you either need to
divide your books between both of them (and hope that both remain alive and
operational) or you need to make your purchases on your preferred store again.

The same holds for videos, movies, TV shows, videos and games. How many DRM
eBook platforms have you seen going out of business? What happened to your
eBooks after they went offline? Did they provide you with a way to unlock and
free your purchases?

At the same time, there is hardly any DRM technique that has not been cracked
and there is hardly any DRM encumbered content that can not be unlocked. The
"DRM protection" is only for the casual, not the determined. It can't thwart
the determined from unlocking the content from the DRM platform and using it
for any purpose.

>The question then becomes: If it is so easy to crack the DRM
> encryption, and if so many people do it and actively share the content on
> various peer-to-peer filesharing websites, what is the value of DRM? Isn't it
> just nuisance value?

I feel most of us who use DRM content use it without being aware of the fact
that DRM exists. We purchase the content because we can afford to purchase it
and because access to it is very easy &amp; convenient. The publisher sets a
low barrier to entry here so they can motivate people to just purchase the
content and become a part of the DRM platform that they might find difficult to
leave because its <em>convenient</em>. The question of DRM only comes in later
on if we want to share it, extract a part from the full content or do something
that we might want to normally do with content that we "own".

The fight against DRM will continue to be difficult as long as we place a value
on this <em>convenience of access</em> to content over our rights to "own" it
in the first place and our freedom to use it in ways that are mainstream and
common in everyday life.

Specifically, streaming services eliminate and invert the whole question of
ownership. They convert a storage problem (storing music on your computer's
hard drive) to a network problem (having the bandwidth to stream music from the
Internet on-demand). They take what would be a very cost-effective, accessible
and easy thing to do (being able to download and store music locally to play
with whichever music player we want) and convert that into an unpleasant user
experience (having to use the publisher's or platform's software to play the
music), needlessly costly and imperfect (flaky bandwidth, high bandwidth
costs). The only leveller here is the convenience of having any music you might
need access to on your fingertips.

## DRM is incompatible with Free Software

The users who are worst hit by DRM are users who choose to use Free Software on
their devices and computers. Since, DRM is so closely locked in to the
publisher's or platform's software (unless you have this software you can not
use the content), you might have to put up with any deficiencies or bugs or
irritations that the software might have in order to access the content.

When you use non-DRM content, you have the ability and freedom to choose the
software you want to use to access the content. This content could be ebooks,
music, videos or even games. With DRM content, you loose this freedom.  Since
the publisher of the content does not want to show you what they are doing to
decrypt the content to make it accessible to you, they can not release the
software with its source code. In fact, a lot of times, they completely leave
out users of GNU/Linux and other Free Software operating sytems from having any
access to the content.

## Can you choose to reject DRM?

How closely tied is your lifestyle to DRMed content? What would you loose out
if you chose not to use DRMed content? Is rejecting DRM sufficient to
discourage publishers from adding DRM to their content? How soon will we have
access to content which is not limited by DRM?

Does rejecting DRM exclude the arts from your life? Does rejecting DRM mean
that you also exclude yourself from watch certain TV shows or listening to
certain music or reading certain books? When does the advantage of rejecting
DRM outweigh the disadvantage of choosing not to access various content?

Is rejecting DRM and choosing peer-to-peer filesharing an ethical choice? Or
would the ethical choice be to reject such content altogether?

I feel that these are all personal judgements. We might feel motivated take a
tough public stand in these matters but personally find it difficult to leave
out certain types of entertainment from our lives.

What if the only way you had access to some music was via a DRM protected
source and this music actually enabled you to be more productive... and this
additional productivity enabled you to be a more prolific contributor to Free
Software projects? Then would using DRM be a good enough trade-off? Is it such
a simple choice to make?

## Choices

Think about it. Make your choices carefully. Consider the wider implications of
your choices. Consider how you strengthen the DRM economy by purchasing DRM
content. Consider how you could contribute to the non-DRM economy by purchasing
content from publishers who don't use DRM.

Choices always exist. Choosing a printed book over a DRM-encrypted eBook might
be inconvenient but its possible. Choosing to buy an non-encrypted DVD might be
cumbersome and costly, but its still possible. Choosing to buy an audio CD or
non-DRM digital music is another choice.

For more than 30 years, the Free Software movement has encourages users to
forsake proprietary software and use and build Free Software in its place.
There have always been arguments about "features not being available", about
"it not being good enough or easy enough" and so on. But that never stopped
people from developing it, contributing to it, using it, improving it, writing
about it or helping others to use it. And, hence today Free Software usage is
more pervasive than ever. Today there is always a Free Software way of doing
things. Today more people use GNU/Linux and Free Software without even
realising it at times.

And hence, I feel, a world without DRM is also possible. The more we reject it,
the weaker DRM becomes. The sooner we reject it, we invite authors and
publishers and content creators to publish content using alternative means.

<strong><em>Consider. And care. I think that is a good start.</em></strong>

