---
title: Why "Open Source" still misses the point!
date: 2018-10-07
Author: Abhas Abhinav
layout: post
permalink: /open-source-still-misses-the-point/
toc: true
subtitle: The term "Open Source" has been misused and misunderstood so
  thoroughly by now that it really doesn't mean anything anymore. Specifically,
  it does not convey the essence of software freedom nor is it suitable for any
  of the other purposes it is used for. "Open Source" continues to miss the
  miss the point even after 20 years!

---

## Background

It is disheartening to see well-meaning people using the term "open
source" for just about everything. In my view, the term "open source"
carries no meaning anymore. Not only does it miss the point and essence
of why software freedom matters (and is the real concern) but it creates
so much ambiguity and confusion that very few people really know what
"open source" really means. I wish we could all stop using it unless we
could use it to mean what it should.

Many years back, FSF published an essay called ["Why Open Source misses
the point of Free
Software"](https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/open-source-misses-the-point.html).
It is an extremely detailed explanation of what's wrong. I intend to
illustrate how that discussion is even more relevant now, than ever.

## What does "Open Source" really mean?

Here is what I found when I searched the website of
[TED](https://ted.com) for the term "open source":

![ted-open-source](/images/2018/10/ted-open-source.png)

Multiple types of topics and content are tagged as "open-source" even
when it has no relevance to that concept. What I'm trying to illustrate
with this simple example is that people tend to use the term "open
source" to refer to "sharing information", "access to education",
"collaboration", "personalised biology", "access to information",
"governance", "collaborative security" and more.

The term "Open Source" as defined by the [Open Source
Initiative](https://opensource.org/) has a specific meaning and is
qualified by the terms of the [Open Source
Definition](https://opensource.org/osd). These terms are very clear and
they provide a framework that can tell us if something is "open source"
or not. If everyone used the term "open source" to imply what the OSD
spells out, there wouldn't be too many "transmission losses". But the
unfortunate truth is that the "marketing effort for Free Software" has
grown into a complete misappropiation of the very values, goals and
intents of both the Free Software and Open Source Software movements.

## How "*Open Source*" was born and where it got us!

Over the past 20 years of the Open Source Initiative, they have
succeeded massively in popularising the term "open source". Initially it
was probably used in the same context as the Open Source Definition. But
over time, it came to mean many other things. And maybe, this happenned
because people thought that the term "open source" was a loose
approximation of whatever they were trying to convery. 

### Motivation behind "open source" ...

The motivation behind coming up with the term "open source" was that the
*de facto* and accepted term, "free software", was [considered ambiguous and
unacceptable to "corporate
types"](http://www.catb.org/~esr/open-source.html). In 1998, this
"marketing effort" was a clever *ploy* to get a greater diversity of
people to consider the option of free software.

However, over the next few years after it was released, the term "open
source" came be to be known for its "development and collaboration
model" than for software freedom. What gained precedence was the "open"
nature of things - an "open community", "open / public discussions and
communication", "open documentation", "over-the-internet and open
collaboration" etc. Amidst all this noise, the essence of software
freedom got further diluted as "*over-zealous pragmatism*" took over. (I
call it "over-zealous pragmatism" because it was considered okay to
compromise on the value that free software offered if it made it easier
to *sell* someone the concept of "open source".)

### ... and where it got us!

In hindsight, I feel this has only proved to be counter-productive. As
other communities and initiaves have picked up this word play on the
word "open", the term "open source" has lost complete connection to its
roots. This is why I said that the term "open source" doesn't really
mean anything specific anymore. Not only does it mean different things
to different people, but it doesn't even mean anything specific to
the one who's using that term. Each person who uses the term "open
source" to describe something other than what is defined in the Open
Source Definition, is doing so because somehow this loose approximation
suits their purpose and lets them imply "something".

Finally, it only results in ["a whole sort of general
mish-mash"](http://hitchhikers.wikia.com/wiki/Whole_Sort_of_General_Mish_Mash).
Imagine a world where no word has any specific meaning, or where the
meaning of many words have lost their literal and technical meaning.
Isn't this what Orwell cautioned us about when he described [Newspeak in
*1984*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newspeak)?

## We should stop using the term "Open Source" altogether!

It would have been okay if those who choose to use the term "open
source" used it in a manner defined by the Open Source Definition and to
refer to free/open source software in particular. The problem arises
when there are unintended and damaging consequences to how people use
it.

At the same time, if you understand the wide-ranging and damaging
side-effects of using the word "open source" when referring to "free
software", then why not use the term "free software" and use the
opportunity you have to explain the value and essence of software
freedom too.

### "Open Source Innovation"?

Consider what the phrase "open source innovation" might mean. Does it
refer to "innovation" who's output is work licensed under the terms of
the Open Source Definition? Or does it refer to a "collaborative method
of problem solving" which might or might not yield a truly "open source
artifact" (software, hardware, writing, music etc.). If that were the
intention, then why not use a more accurate phrase itself? Why borrow a
well-defined and narrow term for an unrelated usage? Either the
understanding about what "open source" really means is flawed. Or the
intentional misuse is a trick.

### "Open Source Ideas"?

Similarly, consider the phrase "open source ideas". It is a complete
misnomer. The very basis of the Open Source Definition (and of the free
software definition) is the Copyright Law. Copyrights cover "expression
of ideas" - software, music, writing etc are all considered expressions
and hence, are covered by copyrights. Patents, on the other hand,
protect inventions. (In most jurisdictions, even India, it is not
possible to patent software because software is equated to mathematics
and not considered an "invention".)

But ideas are neither concrete expressions nor are they inventions.
Hence, if neither the copyright or patent law is applicable to an idea,
what does the term "open source idea" really mean? Does it mean that if
you have an idea, you share it widely and openly within a community
while retaining the right to be identified as its originator? If that is
the intention, then I am sure it is possible to come up with an alternate
name. Just sharing *something* "openly" does not make it "open source".

### "Open Source" is a damaging term

The usage illustrated above not just dilutes the term "open source", but
also extends its scope and purpose - all without the permission of the
Open Source Initiative which actually owns a trademark on the term "open
source". In that sense, it is very damaging to the "open source
movement" and the people involved in it.

It is also damaging because it dilutes and eliminates all discussion
about software freedom - without which it is difficult to imagine how or
why the free/open source software movement would be relevant.

### Free, Libre, Open Source Software (FLOSS) is a good compromise term

I would definitely recommend that we avoid using the term "open source"
for completely unrelated topics. Instead, it will benefit us to find
better and more accurate terms and maybe, in the long run, "open source"
can regain its value and actually mean *something*.

A good compromise term is FLOSS which stands for Free / Libre / Open
Source Source Software and tries to bring the conversation and focus
back to freedom. You might then ask a more basic question - why is it
important to care about or focus on software freedom at all? I attempt
to answer that next.

At the same time, since the "open source" is so misused and
misunderstood, should we even it in places where its meaning might
actually be clear?

## "You should say what you mean!"

  ![mad-tea-party](/images/2018/10/mad-tea-party-highlighted.jpg)
  <p class="caption"> March Hare: <em>you should say what you mean...</em> <br> 
  From <em> Through the Looking Glass </em> by Lewis Carroll
  </p>

Let me conclude by quoting a passage from "Through the Looking Glass" by
Lewis Carroll. March Hare has a bit of wise advice for us. If we are
capable of being accurate about what we are trying to say, then why
wouldn't we say what we mean? Why be ambiguous when it is so easy to be
accurate?

