---
id: 516
title: What do you do when things are going well?
date: 2018-05-20
subtitle: We don't put in enough effort to build skills or acquire tools when
  things are going well... and when things are bad, we desperately crave for
  these same tools that we didn't spend time acquiring.
author: Abhas Abhinav
layout: post
permalink: /2018/05/what-do-you-do-when-things-are-going-well/
image: /wp-content/uploads/2018/05/spider.jpg
categories:
  - adventures
  - learning
---

![Header Image](/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/spider.jpg) 

## Background

Here is what I have been thinking about a lot recently: There is a huge 
gap between our thought process when things are going well versus when 
things are bad. My observation is that we don't put in enough effort to 
build skills or acquire tools when things are going well... and when 
things are <em>bad</em>, we desperately crave for these same tools that 
we didn't spend time acquiring. Let me explain...

Over the past two months, I have seen repeated examples of crises that 
have stemmed from, what I now regard as, a neglect to <em>being 
prepared.</em> I have also observed that we usually don't spend enough 
effort building our competency and polishing our tools during <em>times 
of peace</em>.

## What questions do you ask when you are unprepared to handle a situation?

When faced with a dire situation where I feel I am unable to cope or 
figure out a solution, a question I ask myself is: <em>"What skills, 
knowledge, tools or awareness do I wish I had that would've helped me 
cope with the current situation better"?</em> The problem is, even when 
I arrive at an answer to the above question, I am not in a position to 
use that answer right away. It takes time and peace and patience and 
practise to learn something and to acquire new tools and when I'm in the 
middle of a tough situation, that is hardly the time to put in effort to 
prepare.

If now now, then, when is the next best time to invest energy into 
learning? The next moment you have some peace - no matter how temporary. 
I really can't stress how important this is. I feel very sad when I 
observe people struggle with coping up and figuring out what to do, but 
who won't put in the effort to bring about <em>some</em> change in the 
way they view or do thing or feel about them. There are no instant 
solutions and most learning takes time and effort and that can't be put 
in overnight.

Hence, if we are <strong>only</strong> motivated to put effort into 
learning, or expanding our thoughts and horizons when things go bad, 
then we will never be prepared! We will always struggle to cope. We will 
not learn new lessons. We will not make new mistakes. We will not be 
able to avoid repeating past mistakes.

Whether its your website that got cracked or server which went down or 
friend who let you down or customer who did something unfair... there is 
still something we can do about each of these situations. While the 
situation (and the outcome) itself might not be of our choosing or in 
our control, how we treat it, learn from it, handle it or feel about it 
is completely our choice.

And so the tools and skills that I'm talking about are not just those 
specific things that we can do to pre-empt situations and avoid 
failures. I am also talking about learning that enables us to handle 
unforeseen and undesirable outcomes in a graceful manner that might 
enable us to have more tranquillity in our lives.

## The next time you have peace in your life...

So the next time, you have a some peace in your life when you are 
<strong>not</strong> fire fighting or handling a failure or a challenge, 
think about the last 3 difficult situations where you wish you had the 
ability and <em>tools</em> to handle it better (based on your own 
assessment of "better"Â  - no one else's). And then do whatever it takes 
to build those skills, acquire those tools and absorb the learning.

## How?

Discover / read essays and books, listen to <em>podcasts</em> and talk 
shows, expose yourself to contrasting views that provoke you to think 
and make decisions and judgements for yourself. None of these will 
require you to take permission from anyone else. None of these are 
expensive or require you to be somewhere you can't be. Most of these 
options don't involve depending on others. Hence, they are simple to get 
started with.

There are no right ways to doing anything. There is no universal 
prescription or formula that I or anyone else can give you that will 
work in every situation. The sad thing will be if we are not able to / 
ready to invest into our own well-being and take charge of how we feel 
about something or deal with something.

Conversely, it would be wonderful to have a feeling of greater control. 
It would be wonderful to feel equipped to handle seemingly tough 
situations with poise. It would be quite an achievement if we can 
realise how we can invest into our own personal, technical and spiritual 
growth all the time.

